Lab 27 failure experiments, captured 2026-08-07
Windows, Temurin JDK 21.0.4, Maven 3.9.9, examples\lab27-crm

All five. Every temporary edit is restored and the suite is green at 2 in
01-mvn-test.txt, captured after these.


1, WRONG JDBC URL

  application.yml: jdbc:h2:mem:lab27  ->  jdbc:h2:mem:WRONG;IFEXISTS=TRUE

  mvn -B test -Dtest=TransferServiceTest

  Database "mem:WRONG" not found, and IFEXISTS=true, so we cant auto-create it [90146-224]
  Tests run: 2, Failures: 0, Errors: 2, Skipped: 0 <<< FAILURE!

Both tests error rather than fail. The context cannot build a datasource, so
nothing reaches an assertion. IFEXISTS=TRUE is what makes this visible; without
it H2 creates an empty database called WRONG and the failure becomes a missing
seed instead, which reads as a different bug. URL restored.


2, FORCE FAIL TO ACC-FORCE-FAIL

  HTTP 500, MAIN unchanged, no transaction_log row.

Full transcript and the SQL in 02-transfer-manual.txt. Kept, this is the lab.


3, REPEAT TRANSFER WITH NO IDEMPOTENCY KEY

  Same request posted twice, 25.00 MAIN to LOYALTY:

  {"status":"OK"} HTTP 200
  {"status":"OK"} HTTP 200

  insert into transaction_log count went from 1 to 3

Both succeed and 50.00 moves. Nothing in the request identifies it as the same
transfer, so a retried or double-clicked request is indistinguishable from a
second genuine one. The fix is a caller-supplied idempotency key stored with a
unique constraint, so the second insert loses and the transfer is rejected as a
duplicate. X-Correlation-Id does not do this; it is the same value on both calls
here and nothing reads it.


4, SLEEP INSIDE THE TRANSACTION

  Thread.sleep(3000) added between the debit and the force-fail check.

  Tests run: 2, BUILD SUCCESS
  wall clock 46s, against 26s without the sleep

The transaction stays open for the whole sleep and so does everything it holds.
On H2 in-memory with one caller at a time nothing blocks, which is exactly why
this is a discussion and not a measurement: on a real database the row written
by the debit is locked for those three seconds and every other transfer touching
that account waits. Anything slow and external, an HTTP call to a partner or a
report, belongs outside the boundary. Sleep removed.


5, SELF-INVOKED TRANSFER

A public method with no annotation, calling the transactional one on this:

  public void selfInvokedTransfer(String from, String to, BigDecimal amount) {
    this.transfer(from, to, amount);
  }

Called with ACC-FORCE-FAIL from a temporary test that read the balance either
side:

  EXPERIMENT5 before=1000.00 after=990.00 lost=10.00

The debit committed and stayed committed. 10.00 left MAIN and never arrived
anywhere, which is the debit without a credit the scenario calls an incident.

Two things had to line up. this.transfer does not cross the proxy, so its
@Transactional does nothing and no transaction is started. Spring Data's
SimpleJpaRepository.save is itself annotated, so with no surrounding transaction
each save committed on its own. By the time IllegalStateException was thrown
there was nothing left to roll back.

The same failure happens if transfer is made private, for the same reason. CGLIB
cannot override a private method, so there is no interception point, and the
only way to call it is from inside the class, which is this experiment again.

Method and temporary test both removed. TransferService.transfer is public and
called through the injected bean from TransferController.
